Nearly a hundred years ago, “Steamboat Willie”
is the name of this animation sequence. Walt
Disney launched the first such animation.
Not just plain animation, but the audio perfectly
synchronised with the action on the screen.
And changed the world. The thing we now call
Movie Magic? That’s what he introduced.
Steamboat Willie! Mickey Mouse was introduced.
But, guess what the prevalent assumption is?
That Walt Disney drew the Mickey Mouse character,
created it.. We have seen photos such as this
one, haven’t we? But, it seems he was only
posing for that picture! He didn’t draw
it! A close associate and long time friend
of Walt Disney, by name Ub Iwerks, somebody
who has worked for many years at Disney, he
is the person who actually created it. Walt
Disney gave the voice though. That falsetto
high-pitched tone of Mickey Mouse’s voice?
Disney is the reason! Interesting, eh?!
Namaste! The Illusion of Life! That is the
topic for today! Some people say I have this
bad habit! Of connecting these common day-to-day
quotidian affairs and trying to see some serious
philosophical lesson there, logic there, some
connection there… Many have warned me to
let the thing lie undisturbed! You may remember
perhaps. Quotidian 309 — I tried drawing
some connections between living one’s life
and celebrating Diwali. They may even be tenuous
connections… I tried doing that. And then,
in Quotidian 341, my son took me on a ride
in the car, and immediately I started comparing
the Journey of Life with the journey one does
on a highway, and I tried doing a Quotidian
on it. Do take a look at them and tell me
how you feel. If you like those two, you may
like this one too.
Because, we are going to talk about this book.
This book is called The Illusion of Life.
The master animators who have spent decades
perfecting the art inside the art factory
of Walt Disney.. they have put together an
amazing.. a visual treasurehouse.. beautifully
illustrated, lucidly explained… The whole
world of animation, explained in twelve simple
principles. “Here are these twelve principles.
You follow them!” he said, gifting it to
humanity. But, what is so beautiful about
it? Every clip, every movie, every bit of
animation that had been done till then, followed
those twelve principles. And, guess what?
Every bit of animation that has come AFTER
that book was published, continue to follow
those twelve principles. Almost like the Ten
Commandments. Twelve Principles. We are going
to look at some of those principles from that
book. And, we are going to try and connect
those up with life to see if there can be
any thoughtful reflections that we can gain.
One of those principles is called “Squash
and Stretch”. Crushing and Stretching. As
it gets faster, it gets stretched.. As it
decelerates, even if it is a human being.
Crouches.. Squash.. And then elongate. Stretch.
Here is another visualisation. Squash and
Stretch. When falling, it extends… the emphasis
is on speed, momentum, weight, mass. If you
look at the whole sequence without the stretch-effect,
it looks hard, unnatural.. With Stretch and
Squash in place, there is a life that is attached
to it. Realism. Even human beings. When picturising
them.. If they are going to jump, the way
they crouch. Squash. Even faces. Without Squash,
it looks dull and boring. With a Squash, there
is realism.
After teaching all this, the creators give
us one little warning. The warning is the
thing that rang a bell in my head. The warning,
goes like this. They say, Squash, Stretch,
Animate, is all fine. But, remember! The volume
of the object should be retained. When a square
squashes into a rectangle, the other dimension
must be proportionately affected too. If you
are going to elongate along one axis, you
NEED to contract along the other. Only when
I saw this, did I realise that there is a
life lesson hidden there. We try to become
a Generalist. We try to become a Specialist.
The mistake is, we wonder if we could become
both. Sorry, dear friend, that’s impossible.
If you are going to spread yourself wide,
and know, learn, a lot of things, by all means
do. But, realise you can’t go deep. If you
want to go really deep into something, understand
everything there is to learn about it under
the sun, if that is your intent, pick a narrow
subject, go deep. Because, you cannot stretch
in two dimensions. You Squash in one, you
HAVE to Stretch in the other, and if you want
to Stretch in one, you HAVE to Squash in the
other. What do you think?!
Here is another principle from that book.
This principle is called Anticipation. Expectation.
If a ball is going to bounce from here to
there, it won’t traverse a simple straight
path. Watch! It goes back a bit.. There is
an anticipation. If a person jumps, he first
crouches and then jumps up. A golfer does
the same with his “backward swing”. Why
is this important? Well, Disney says, viewers
need to be TOLD what to look for on the screen.
The screen is too big! 30-inch TV sets have
given way to 78-inch TVs. Where do you look?
There is too much happening all the time!
And so, attract the attention of the audience
by showing where the action is going to happen
next. That is the core rationale behind Anticipation
in animation. Introduce Anticipation. Here
is another example. Anticipation. There is
a wait-and-release. Pull back and release.
Is he jumping? Well, there is a go down and
then release. If he jumps without crouching,
without coiling himself into a spring so to
speak, it will be lifeless and unreal. Not
realistic. While running. While punching.
When you pull back and punch, you are able
to believe that the guy will cartwheel. But,
when that is not there, he just falls flat.
Running. When you pull back, you CAN be Usain
Bolt. Showing shock. Shocking expressions.
There is a pullback… Some expression is
about to be shown. Now, show that expression.
This is good advice for animators. Good advice
to capture the attention of viewers. But I
thought, hey, Thiruvalluvar has said the same
too. Do you remember that Kural? The ram pulls
back its legs in preparation for the powerful
headbutt with its enemy. So that it can fight,
it can ram, stronger, harder. Do you remember
this one? Life lesson, I thought.
One more principle from that book, is called
Staging. The authors remind us that we are
not drawing our characters in a featureless
void. There is a camera, there are some lights,
there is a background, there is a foreground,
there is an action happening, you have to
look at all these before deciding how to position
your characters, the book says. See how beautifully
this artist has depicted in this scene. A
guy, proposing to a girl, and the girl showing
her happy shock and surprise! Nice! But, look
at that. He is offering a flower. How perfect
the pose is! Strong posing, look at the attitude,
the mood, the idea, it is drawn so well in
fact, that if you remove all the inside details
and look at them as just silhouettes, even
then you get the idea of the shocked girl
and the supplicating young man. This is the
perfect drawing.
Compare it with this drawing. In this, it
is the same guy, the same girl, the same intent,
but see how the intent is conveyed… Because
the guy is facing the camera, it is missing
from the silhouette version. Is that a flower
in his hand? Or a knife? Or perhaps a gun?!
What is he having in his hand? This is BAD
drawing, while that is good staging, say the
authors. What lesson can we take away from
this? Well, the one thing that occurred to
me the instant I set eyes upon it, was this.
Staging.. Yourself! Who are you? Can you consistently
display it and demonstrate it, irrespective
of the performing stage? Whether you are on
stage, or off stage, from whatever angle and
point of view they look at you from, will
they be able to glean what kind of person
you are? If A R Rahman is going to say he
can perform only when is on the stage, with
his favourite piano at his side, he can’t
be a world-famous musician. On the other hand,
whatever he has around him, he will consistently
create amazing world-class tunes, and that
is why he is truly famous, that is the consistency,
that is good staging. Point of view matters.
Ensure, even if those defining details are
knocked off, when I look at you as a silhouette,
will you still speak of who you are and what
you stand for? Then, you are the Maryadha
Purush.
One more principle from that book. This is
called Exaggeration. To overdo things! Specifically,
Walt Disney used to go ask his artists to
exaggerate the features of the animated content!
Here, take a look at this series of animations.
A person turning to look. Reflecting the way
it happens in real life… Slowly, there is
an Exaggeration introduced. The eyebrows go
up. The gape widens. The eyebrows peel off
the forehead. The eyes are now bulging out.
And now, finally, they pop all the way out!
Do you see that? The cartoonisation? The caricaturisation?
Disney says this is important because, the
world is filled with bored, tired, lazy people.
If we are to quickly and surely grab the attention
of these people, you need to indulge in that
little bit of Exaggeration. Go beyond realism.
Do you remember this movie? This is from the
movie The Mask. The eyes are popping out,
the heart does a dance outside the shirt,
… you must remember this guy! Everything
he did was Exaggerated. Why did they attempt
this? People are bored. People are tired.
People are habituated to realism. If you are
going to show something JUST AS IT HAPPENED,
well, I am not interested. I can see that
all around me. You are not attracting me enough.
But.. If I Exaggerate, if I show you something
that you can’t really ever see in the Real
World, then, you are interested! Probably
that’s the situation in real life too. The
world is FILLED with average people. If you
are going to be happy being average, without
exerting an Exaggerated effort, without demonstrating
an Exaggerated result, if you are going to
be fine with it, well, I don’t think you
are going to be noticed, I don’t think you
will be counted. So, if you are aspiring for
that spotlight, for that fame, do something
extra. Go beyond the brief. Run the extra
mile! Lesson?!
Meanwhile, along with these twelve principles,
there are some rules of Physics that get broken
too! In this world of cartoons, some rules
are turned upside down, nonchalantly disobeyed
too! I want to talk about two rules and what
we learn from those.
Here is Rule Number One. We call it the Free
Fall Fallacy. What is that? I am sure you
remember Wile E Coyote and the Road Runner.
It is all foggy out there in the desert. Road
Runner has arrived too.. And that’s when
he realises, there is nothing underneath.
Are we standing in thin air?? That’s when
gravity takes over. This is so common that
one doesn’t even get a laugh these days,
looking at this charade. But… there is a
lesson there. When you are in pursuit of your
goal, with single-minded obsession, with an
unwavering focus, if you are proceeding forward,
won’t they say the usual, “The Universe
will PAVE the way”? Rules will bend. Rules
will break. For you! But the moment that small
crack, that fissure, that seed of doubt gets
sown.. What am I doing? Can I even do this?
Is this even possible? That is enough. Gravity
will come knock at the door. Newton will take
over. Till then, you can pursue your goal.
So, singleminded obsessive focus is so important.
Is such a blessing!
Another law of physics. Let us watch it being
broken! Again, Wile E Coyote! And the Road
Runner! This is called the Perforation Paradox.
A vehicle is coming right ahead. Towards the
coyote. Did you notice the hole made on the
rear wall of the vehicle? And on this floor?
And on this screen? Exactly matching the body
that went through. While I watched this, I
had an epiphany. An important lesson. I almost
felt like hitting myself on the head. This
is the mistake I had been doing all along..
The mistake, the fundamental core mistake
in the act of giving advice. Guess why these
bits of advice fall flat, are useless, usually
irrelevant, and never really taken seriously?
Why is not received well? Why is it so hard
to implement? Well, look at it.. What do we
give our advice based on? It is based on OUR
past. Our prior experience. And, our prior
experience is like this hole. It is different
for every single one of us. So, based on just
my prior experience, if I am going to say,
THIS approach will work out, THIS approach
will lead you to success, THIS approach will
lead you to failure only, it is going to work
only if YOUR silhouette is the same as mine,
do you get it? I can go through this hole.
Can you? You can’t. Because your hole is
different. Your silhouette is different. That
is the reason most advice is probably useless,
unpalatable, irrelevant, impractical. What
do you think? The world of cartooning. Giving
us something to take away. In the world of
philosophy, good living, and motivation.
Anyway, closing thought. I want to tell you
about Bertolt Brecht. A philosopher. A German
philosopher. He has given a beautiful quote,
one that connects Art and Life. He says, “Art
is not a mirror to reflect reality,”…
It could be cinema, it could be music, it
could be paintings, that is not art. To reflect
the way things are today.. Our heritage. Our
culture. Art has a greater duty. A higher
honor. Guess what? “Art is the hammer that
scults, that shapes, reality!” If such amazing
artists create such amazing art, how amazing
can that culture become!? Probably Walt Disney
wasn’t thinking about all that, when formulating
those twelve principles. But, he has given
us lessons. Lessons to live by. What do you
think? Let’s meet again. In just two more
days. Thank you!